<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A highly Rabelaisian phrase is omitted. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Translated from the Welsh verses quoted in the notebook. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The following translation of these verses appeared in <i>Poems from the Old Bards</i>, by Taliesin, Bristol, 1812:</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<span class="i0">“In Soar’s sweet valley, where the sound<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Of holy anthems once was heard<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">From many a saint, the hills prolong<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Only the music of the bird.<br/></span>
						</div>
						<div class="stanza">
							<span class="i0">In Soar’s sweet valley, where the brook<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">With many a ripple flows along,<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Delicious prospects meet the eye,<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">The ear is charmed with <i>Phil’mel’s</i> song.<br/></span>
						</div>
						<div class="stanza">
							<span class="i0">In Soar’s sweet valley once a Maid,<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Despising worldly prospects gay,<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Resigned her note in earthly choirs<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Which now in Heaven must sound alway.<br/></span>
						</div>
						<div class="stanza">
							<span class="i0">In Soar’s sweet valley David preached;<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">His Gospel accents so beguiled<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">The savage Britons, that they turned<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Their fiercest cries to music mild.<br/></span>
						</div>
						<div class="stanza">
							<span class="i0">In Soar’s sweet valley Cybi taught<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">To haughty Prince the Holy Law,<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">The way to Heaven he showed, and then<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">The subject tribes inspired with awe.<br/></span>
						</div>
						<div class="stanza">
							<span class="i0">In Soar’s sweet valley still the song<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Of Phil’mel sounds and checks alarms.<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">But when shall I once more renew<br/></span>
							<span class="i0">Those heavenly hours in Gladys’ arms?”<br/></span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>“Taliesin” was the pseudonym of an amiable clergyman, the Reverend Owen Thomas, for many years curate of Llantrisant. He died in 1820, at the great age of eighty-four. His original poetry in Welsh was reputed as far superior to his translations, and he made a very valuable and curious collection of “Cymric Antiquities,” which remains in manuscript in the keeping of his descendants. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
